Date: 4 Nov 2023
Title: Client Side Rendering and Server Side Rendering
Desc:

- Server Side Rendering (SSR)
Is the traditional way of rendering webpages. When a user requests a page from a server, the server processes the request and generates the complete HTML file, which is then sent to the user's browser. The browser receeives the complete HTML file and displays it to the user.

- Client Side Rendering
Client Side Rendering is a more modern approach to rendering web pages. Here, the server sends only the necessary data and Javascript files to the browser. The browser then generates the HTML file and renders it on the user's screen.

- Differences:
1. Performance: SSR tends to have better performance as user receives a complete HTML file from server. CSR, on the other hand requires the browser to do more work, which can lead to slower loading times.

2. SEO SSR is better for SEO as search engines can easily crwal and index the complete HTML file In CSR, the HTML file is generated by Javascript which can be difficult for search engines to crawl.

3. Security: SSR is generally considered more secure as the server processes and generates the complete HTML file. In CSR, the browser has more control over the rendering process, which can potentially lead to security vulnerabilities. 

- How to check for SSR
1. Check page source: if all html code as is is present then SSR if bare bone html present then CSR

2. Google cache-. type url like ```site:https//www.freecodecamp.org/``` the select Cached. anything visually seen is SSR.

3. Disable Javascript. If content visible-> SSR

- Drawbacks of SSR:
Plain HTML needs to be interactive.
Solution to that is an added layer of complexity that goes by many names, but it’s most commonly known as code-splitting and hydration.

1. Code Splitting and Hydration
In order for a page to be interactive, we need JavaScript to be sent to the client. SSR frameworks such as Next.js and Astro allow us to build an HTML only page on the server that can be sent to the client fast, while allowing for specific bundles of JavaScript to be sent to the client after the initial HTML has loaded.

2. In the React world, this process is known as hydration. The code is split into manageable chunks that can then be requested on an as needed basis and injected, or hydrated, into the client page to add interactivity and functionality.

3. You may be wondering why this is a “drawback.” Well, the idea itself isn’t the drawback, it’s the technical challenge that comes along with it. Isomorphic React and other technologies that are used to accomplish this goal are notoriously complex, and it takes intimate knowledge of a framework to program these sites efficiently.




# For more clear view let's see some benefits and downside of both rendering methods-

- Benefits of SSR -
The initial page of the website load is faster as there are fewer codes to render.
Good for minimal and static sites.
Search engines can crawl the site for better SEO.

- Downsides of SSR -
the site interactions are less.
Slow page rendering.
Full UI reloads.
Frequent server requests.

- Benefits of CSR -
The app feels more responsive and users do not see the flash between page navigations due to full-page refreshes.
Fewer HTTP requests are made to the server, as the same assets do not have to be downloaded again for each page load.
Clear separation of the concerns between the client and the server; you can easily build new clients for different platforms (e.g. mobile, chatbots, smartwatches) without having to modify the server code. You can also modify the technology stack on the client and server independently, as long as the API contract is not broken.

- Downsides of CSR -
Heavier initial page load due to loading of the framework, app code, and assets required for multiple pages.
There's an additional step to be done on your server which is to configure it to route all requests to a single entry point and allow client-side routing to take over from there.
In most cases, requires an external library.
All search engines execute JavaScript during crawling, and they may see empty content on your page. This inadvertently hurts the Search Engine Optimization (SEO) of your app.
However, most of the time, when you are building apps, SEO is not the most important factor, as not all the content needs to be indexable by search engines. To overcome this, you can either server-side render your app or use services such as Prerender to "render your javascript in a browser, save the static HTML, and return that to the crawlers".



- When to use server-side rendering
An application has a very simple UI with fewer pages/features
An application has less dynamic data
Read preference of the site is more than write
The focus is not on rich sites and has few users

- When to use client-side rendering
An application has a very complex UI with many pages/features
An application has large and dynamic data
Write preference of the site is more than reading
The focus is on rich sites and a huge number of users



- Hydration
When using Static Site generators, the HTML for the webpage is generated on the server-side(at build time). Static Site Generators send this static HTML and the app JS bundle to the browser when the browser accesses the website. The static HTML is displayed immediately within the browser, while the app JS bundle continues to download in the background. Now, after the app JS bundle is downloaded and initialized (on the browser-side), there is no need for the browser to re-generate the same HTML components on the browser-side.
This is because executing the JS code within the browser would generate exactly the same HTML components that were generated when that JS code was executed on the server-side.
React/Vue recognizes this, and instead of re-generating the HTML components on the client-side (for a web page whose HTML components were already generated on the server-side), React reuses the HTML components that were sent to it by the server, and attaches “interactivity” to it i.e. It attaches event handles etc. to it. This process is called “hydration”.
Hydration is a process where a frontend framework like React, VueJS re-uses the static HTML structure it receives from the server (that was created at server-side at build time), and instead of re-generating the HTML nodes on the browser, simply “breathes” event handlers and interactivity into it.


- Static Site Generators
Static Site Generators are frameworks that are built over the base frontend frameworks eg. React, Vue, and allow us to pre-render the HTML of the web apps by running then on the server-side at “build” time.
Static Site Generators (like NextJS, Gatsby, Nuxt, VuePress etc) run Single Page Applications (built in React, Vue etc.) on the server-side.
NextJS and Gatsby are built on the base React frontend framework.
NuxtJS and VuePress are built on the base Vue frontend framework.
Static Site Generators(SSGs) in effect execute the SPA Javascript code at build time and pre-generate the HTML on the server-side.
SSGs frameworks (like NextJS (SSR) and VueSSR) can also be configured to execute SPA Javascript code on the server side at request time, if needed.
The name Static Site Generators is somewhat of a misnomer. The “static” part refers to the fact that they generate “static HTML”. However these SSGs (i.e. NextJS, NuxtJS, Gatsby, VuePress) can all be used to write fully dynamic and interactive web apps.